`systemd` migration blog post and documentation updates (#5022)
jenkins-infra/jenkins.io: content/blog/2022/03/2022-03-25-systemd-migration.adoc

The following section describes some of the changes in more detail and explains how to perform common system administration tasks.
For up-to-date information, refer to the link:/doc/book/system-administration/systemd-services/[Managing systemd services] page in the documentation.
See also the link:https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/how-to-use-systemctl-to-manage-systemd-services-and-units[DigitalOcean community `systemd(1)` tutorial] to better understand the benefits of `systemd(1)` and the `systemctl(1)` command.

==== Package configuration

Users who run Jenkins 2.335 or later and 2.332.1 LTS or later through the official Debian, Red Hat, or openSUSE packages are affected by this migration.

NOTE: The link:https://hub.docker.com/r/jenkins/jenkins[official Docker image] and link:https://charts.jenkins.io/[Helm chart] remain unchanged.

The System V `init(8)` packages delivered the following configuration files:

Debian:: `/etc/default/jenkins`
Red Hat:: `/etc/sysconfig/jenkins`
openSUSE:: `/etc/sysconfig/jenkins`

> These configuration each used a unique format, with the Debian version being radically different from the Red Hat and openSUSE versions.

Author: Fixed in ed4ab2f90.

> These configuration each used a unique format, with the Debian version being radically different from the Red Hat and openSUSE versions.

Author: And again in 8eff85586.

Furthermore, manual edits to these files would frequently conflict with updated upstream versions, triggering the package manager to flag the conflict and requiring manual intervention on upgrade.

New versions of Jenkins still ship these files and support Linux distributions that do not use `systemd(1)`.

> At the time, no actively-supported distributions based on Red Hat or openSUSE are known to use System V `init(8)`, leaving the `/etc/sysconfig/jenkins` file in a vestigial state and unused at runtime.

Reviewer: Given I had to google the word and still don't understand what it means I think this should be simplified, suggested wording
```suggestion
At the time, no actively-supported distributions based on Red Hat or openSUSE are known to use System V `init(8)`, the `/etc/sysconfig/jenkins` file is left in place and unused at runtime.
```

Reviewer 2: I agree that `vestigial` is better replaced by another term for our multi-language, multi-continent, and multi-culture audience.

Author: "Vestigial" just means an organ that no longer has a purpose but nevertheless has survived evolution, like the appendix. And encountering words that one does not know, looking them up, and learning is a great way to improve one's vocabulary. At least that is how I have improved mine.

In general I dislike making writing decisions based on the assumed level of readers' vocabulary, and the suggestion contains a [comma splice](https://www.grammarly.com/blog/comma-splice/), but in this particular case it seems like it would be especially easy to be confused, so I have reworded this in commit c0cf522dd.

or use a command like `systemctl edit jenkins --full`, which copies the original service unit instead of creating a drop-in unit.

A final point to mention about the service unit is its use of specifiers,
which may be unfamiliar to some users.
The `systemd(1)` documentation contains link:https://www.freedesktop.org/software/systemd/man/systemd.unit.html#id-1.13.3[a table of specifiers available in unit files].

==== Migration

The Jenkins project ships logic to automatically migrate the System V `init(8)` configuration file to the new `systemd(1)` `override.conf` format.
This migration logic does nothing if an `override.conf` file already exists,
which would be an indication that the migration script already ran
or that the user has made their own customizations that should be preserved.
If `override.conf` does not exist, package installation migrates the old System V `init(8)` configuration file to `override.conf`.

==== Logging

The `systemd(1)` package also uses `systemd-journald(8)` for logging by default.
Rather than creating a log file in `/var/log/jenkins.log`,
Jenkins now logs to the system's journal.
Log entries may be viewed with `journalctl -u jenkins`.

> This is perhaps the most noticeable user-visible change in this migration.
> 

Reviewer 2: Consider adding a link to a log management tutorial?
```suggestion
This is perhaps the most noticeable user-visible change in this migration.

See the link:https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/how-to-use-journalctl-to-view-and-manipulate-systemd-logs[DigitalOcean log management tutorial] for more detailed information.
```

==== Startup notifications

The System V `init(8)` logic was asynchronous; i.e., running `/etc/init.d/jenkins start` would return prior to the completion of Jenkins startup.
The `systemd(1)` logic is synchronous; i.e., running `systemctl start jenkins` will block until Jenkins signals successful startup.
This allows system administrators to write automation to programmatically deploy Jenkins using modern tools like Ansible.

=== Reporting issues

If you find a regression, please file a bug report in link:https://issues.jenkins.io/[Jira].
When reporting an issue, include the following information:

> . Use the `core` component.

Reviewer 2: I've seen a number of other packaging related issues reported in the packaging project. Is there a specific reason you chose core rather than packaging? (non-blocking question, I'm asking for my information, not to block the pull request)

```suggestion
. Use the `packaging` component.
```

. Provide the name, version, and architecture of the Linux distribution you are using (e.g., Ubuntu 20.04.4 LTS x86_64).
. Provide the contents of the old System V `init(8)` configuration in `/etc/{default,sysconfig}/jenkins`, sanitized as necessary.
. Provide the contents of the `systemd(1)` drop-in unit in `/etc/systemd/system/jenkins.service.d/override.conf`, sanitized as necessary.
. Provide steps to reproduce the issue from _scratch_ on a minimal Jenkins installation; the scenario should fail when the steps are followed on Jenkins 2.335 or later and pass when the steps are followed on Jenkins 2.334 or earlier.

=== Conclusion

> We expect to see a bit of disruption from these changes but hope that in the long run they will save time for core and plugin developers and lead to a more secure and stable tool. Please reach out on the developers' list with any questions or suggestions.

Reviewer 2: Optional that sentence per line is easier to review and recommended in the style guide.
```suggestion
We expect to see a bit of disruption from these changes but hope that in the long run they will save time for core and plugin developers and lead to a more secure and stable tool.
Please reach out on the link:https://groups.google.com/g/jenkinsci-dev[developers' mailing list] with any questions or suggestions.
```
